

# My first chapter

In 2007, Kristina Graff, a new mom, entered her pediatrician’s office. She was worried. Despite being exclusively breastfed, her baby was not gaining weight as she’d hoped.



Graff expected support from her doctor, especially after being encouraged to breastfeed in the hospital after delivery. She was wrong.



“Maybe something’s wrong with your breast milk,” Graff recalled her doctor telling her.



Her pediatrician recommended supplementation with infant formula and even stressed a preferred brand.



“She said, ‘Enfamil is best.’ And I remember thinking, ‘Why?’” Graff recalled.



Graff’s experience isn’t unusual. New parents frequently come to their pediatricians with infant feeding concerns, according to a survey done by SERMO, an online network of physicians. And when that happens, doctors dole out free formula samples 59 percent of the time, the survey found.



[Graff’s experience inspired her to research what happens](http://example.com) to breastfeeding trends when hospitals distribute free formula to new moms. She found a strong association between discharge “gift bags” containing formula and lower rates of breastfeeding. As the Director of Global Health Programs at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public International Affairs at Princeton University, she co-authored a paper on the subject with Deborah Kaplan, assistant commissioner of the Bureau of Maternal, Infant and Reproductive Health at the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Their paper helped shape regulatory policies that limit discharge gift bags to moms leaving the hospital.



Despite greater limitations on free formula handouts to moms upon discharge, an analysis of data from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention indicates that having hospitals accept free formula from manufacturers is another, perhaps even bigger part of the problem. In the 25 states where at least 75 percent of hospitals accept free formula from manufacturers, exclusive breastfeeding rates at three months averaged just over 30 percent. In the 10 states where 60 percent or less of hospitals accept free formula,, exclusive breastfeeding rates at three months averaged nearly 50 percent.



“That’s really interesting,” Graff said. “I can only speculate, but it may be the case that when you have the formula there and it costs the hospital nothing…it’s appealing. And maybe that somehow trickles down to the patient.”