---
title: The United States is an outlier 
chapter: 2
banner_url: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c1/Visual_of_USA_Flag_stars_and_stripes_FJM88NL.jpg
banner_caption: Flag graphic by Wikimedia Commons user [FJM88NL](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AVisual_of_USA_Flag_stars_and_stripes_FJM88NL.jpg)
---




In 1981, the World Health Organization (WHO) introduced the International Code of Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes, “the Code,” which limits advertising of infant formula. The Code received significant global support with 118 votes in favor of the policy. The vote was near unanimous with just one dissenting vote – the U.S. 
Since then, individual countries have continued to tighten regulations. In 2007, the UK banned all formula ads directed to parents. In 2012, Sweden adopted new regulations against formula advertising, restricting manufacturers from using photos of babies on promotional materials. Earlier this year, Australian government officials announced a preliminary vote against formula marketing and free sampling to the medical community, pharmacies, and supermarkets. Just last month, the Chinese government said it is considering a ban on direct-to-consumer formula ads intended for babies less than a year of age.
In addition to banning free samples given to pregnant women, new moms and families, the WHO’s Code states that health facilities and health professionals should not have a role in promoting breastmilk substitutes. Specifically, the Code prohibits product marketing in healthcare facilities. It also bans free or low-cost formula supplies to “any part of the healthcare system.” 

As of 2011, the most recent year for which data is available, 37 nations had adopted the Code in full. An additional 47 nations adopted many of the Codes’ provisions and nearly 30 more adopted some form of the Code, according to UNICEF. In 1994, thirteen years after that first vote, the U.S. endorsed the Code for the first time. But it remains one of just six countries to have taken no regulatory action, along with Kazakhstan, Somalia, Chad, Iceland, and the Central African Republic.

Strict limits on formula advertising are prevented by broad marketing freedoms in the U.S., according to U.S. government officials. In December of 1981, the New York Times quoted former Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, Elliott Abrams, speaking against formula ad bans. Abrams said a complete ban on advertising to the general public of infant formula threatened our “constitutional guarantees of free speech and freedom of information.” 

Kaplan and Graff touched on the concept of basic freedoms in their research, arguing against advertising: 

>*“Adequate food and nutrition are basic human rights,” they wrote. “The widespread promotion of infant formula, which provides suboptimal infant nourishment, and lack of community, institutional, and government support for breastfeeding, all undermine this right.”*

In general, countries with greater ad regulations report higher rates of breastfeeding. In those countries where the Code is adopted full or to a large extent, breastfeeding rates averaged nearly 73 percent at 12 months, according to an analysis of UNICEF data. Those countries that have yet to take regulatory action, including the U.S., have average breastfeeding rates of just over 60 percent at one year. 

Despite the positive influence of ad bans, individual country demographics continue to determine breastfeeding rates to some extent, the data show. In general, long-term breastfeeding rates are significantly higher in developing versus developed countries, WHO data indicate. While most babies continue to be breastfed past 12 months in developing countries, more than half of babies stop receiving any breastmilk by six months across developed countries.

[Track breastfeeding rates and ad regulation across the globe](https://public.tableau.com/views/UpdatedUSMap/Formulauseinhospitalsandbreastfeedingrates?:embed=y&:showTabs=y&:display_count=yes)

Wall Street analysts also suggest that some Code regulations may be less effective than others. Analysts predict a ban on direct-to-consumer ads in China, for example, will have little, if any, impact on formula sales. Top formula executives also dismiss possible effects of consumer-directed ad bans.

In an April conference call to investors, Mead Johnson Chief Executive Officer, Kasper Jakobsen said banning consumer-targeted ads in China would simply mean a shift toward advertisement through the medical community. 

>*“I think we’re very familiar with operating in these kinds of frameworks,” he said. “It allows us to utilize our medical sales force quite well.”*

