---
title: The impact of formula in the hospital
chapter: 3
---

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends breastfeeding in conjunction with solid food for at least a year, while the WHO recommends breastfeeding for two years. Policy makers hope efforts to ban discharge bags containing formula will help support women in meeting these recommendations.

Today, under a third of hospitals provide discharge bags to moms, down from nearly two-thirds in 2008. Four states also ban discharge bags in all hospitals. 

But the data show that **just banning discharge bags doesn’t always mean change in breastfeeding rates.** Maryland, for example, has one of the lowest levels of breastfeeding at three months at 29 percent. Yet in that state, only 18 percent of hospitals reported formula handouts to moms leaving the hospital, well under the national average. 

Longer-term breastfeeding rates remain low in the U.S. More than half of moms are no longer breastfeeding by six months. Analysis of CDC data also shows another interesting trend: in states where a high percentage of hospitals accept free formula, the long-term breastfeeding rates tend to be lower than in states where fewer hospitals accept formula for free. This suggests that the mere acceptance of free formula by hospitals may impact how long a mom breastfeeds and not just the rate of breastfeeding.  

Nationwide, 75 percent of hospitals report accepting free formula from manufacturers, according to CDC data. In Mississippi, the CDC reports virtually all hospitals are accepting free formula. There, just over half of moms report any breastfeeding and only 17 percent report exclusive breastfeeding at three months, less than half the national average. 

CDC data reveal a trend across Southern states, where breastfeeding levels have historically remained below average. Across Mississippi, Arkansas, Kentucky, Georgia, Louisiana, and Tennessee, only about half of moms report any amount of breastfeeding, nearly 20 percentage points lower than the national average. Almost all hospitals report accepting free formula in these six states.

[Track formula use in hospitals and breastfeeding rates](https://public.tableau.com/views/UpdatedUSMap/Formulauseinhospitalsandbreastfeedingrates?:embed=y&:showTabs=y&:display_count=yes)

When summarizing her research, Graff said support in the hospital heavily influenced breastfeeding rates, along with support at home and in the workplace.

>*“What we know as a baseline on breastfeeding is that it’s harder to initiate and sustain breastfeeding if you don’t have support in the hospital,” she said.*

In New York, where acceptance rates of free formula are above average, data support this relationship. There, 35 percent of hospitals report using the formula in the hospital, the highest level nationwide, along with Nevada. 

Graff also speculated that the inverse relationship between breastfeeding trends and free formula in the hospital could have to do with simple psychology. 

>*“Social psychology research [tells us] that repeated exposure to a brand makes it seem more trustworthy in the absence of other information,” she said.*

Susan Crowe, Clinical Associate Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Stanford School of Medicine in Palo Alto, Calif., proposed a biologic explanation. She said the correlation between low breastfeeding rates and those hospitals that accept and use free formula may have to do with milk supply, which is generally established in the immediate days following delivery while a mom is still in the hospital. 

“This could be related to the fact that early supplementation is a roadblock for establishing milk supply,” Crowe said. **“While sometimes a baby has medical indications for supplementation, formula usage in the hospital during a baby’s first days of life could have a negative impact on breastfeeding.”** 

Crowe said once hospitals accept any kind of handout – free formula inventory, for example – formula companies may then have free rein to send more goods, including marketing materials to strengthen their influence upon patients and providers. 

>*“Soon a manufacturer has this major campaign here where they’re telling moms not to worry about their supply because there’s formula for them right here,” she said. “And it’s free.”*

Where individual hospitals have instituted policies against formula advertising, breastfeeding rates tend to be higher, the analysis shows. Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Berkeley, Calif., for example, does not allow any advertising of formula products, nor are formula representatives permitted in its women and infants units, said Carolyn Kemp, Communications and Public Relations Regional Manager. Alta Bates reported an exclusive breastfeeding rate of 89 percent in the hospital in 2013, according to the California WIC Association.

Alta Bates also has a policy against providing formula discharge bags to patients leaving the hospital. Kemp said the hospital does provide formula to select patients in the hospital, however, in its newborn intensive care unit and to moms who are unable to breastfeed. 

>*“We feel strongly those sorts of activities send the wrong message to our new mothers,” Kemp said of formula marketing in the hospital setting. She declined comment on whether the hospital received free formula from manufacturers.*

While Stanford’s Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital provides patients with discharge bags, they do not include infant formula, Crowe said. According to Robert Dicks, Senior Director of Media Relations at Lucile Packard, the hospital only provides free formula to moms “if the family has chosen to bottle feed.”  

Lucile Packard does accept free formula from manufacturers with whom they are contracted, however, Dicks said. The hospital’s rate of exclusive breastfeeding was 74 percent in 2013, and its rate of any breastfeeding was over 97 percent, according to the California WIC Association. 

In her book, Holding Corporations Accountable, Judith Richter cites intense competition to “donate” products to hospitals and other institutions as strong evidence of the value of medical endorsements. During the 1970s, one company paid a million dollars to New York City to provide formula to all city hospitals, she wrote. 

>*“Formula companies donate and give free formula to hospitals for a reason,” Crowe agreed. “It’s not out of altruism that they’re giving it.”*

Because formula supplementation is sometimes desired or medically necessary, formula manufacturers say they push for products and information in the hospital and doctor’s office setting for educational purposes. 

“It’s important parents have not only the information they need to help ensure their baby’s optimal nutrition and overall well-being, but also feel supported by their hospitals and healthcare providers,” said Robin Applebaum, Communications Director for the Infant Nutrition Council of America. Mead Johnson representatives asked for Applebaum to comment on their behalf. 

Lindsy Delco, U.S. Director of Public Affairs of Abbott Nutrition, said Abbott’s formula samples and informational material are provided to hospitals both to educate moms and ensure they understand the benefits of the company’s Similac brand. 

“The samples and educational materials we offer in the U.S. are one way we help moms when they have made the decision to introduce formula,” she said. 

Delco said marketing of Abbott’s Similac formula brand is intended solely “for moms who cannot or choose not to use breast milk.” 

“We market our Similac infant formulas to compete against other brands of infant formula, not to compete against breastfeeding,” she said in an email. 

