---
title: Tracking the influence of government
chapter: 5
banner_url: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/6d/Enfamil_Gentlease_Infant_Formula.JPG
banner_caption: Photo by Wikimedia Commons user [ParentingPatch](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AEnfamil_Gentlease_Infant_Formula.JPG)
---



In the U.S., the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program, led by the Department of Agriculture (USDA), gives nutritional support for infants of low-income families, including free formula. A $6 billion program, WIC is the largest purchaser of infant formula in the U.S., with roughly half of the country’s parents and infants participating and receiving free vouchers for formula.

The program is managed at the state level. States grant winner-take-all contracts to formula manufacturers. The contract winner becomes the sole provider of formula for WIC consumers via major pharmacies and retailers. 

U.S. market share for formula companies is contingent upon contracts won and lost. In fact, the WIC program accounts for more than half of Mead Johnson’s retail sales in the U.S., according to Ken Goldman, senior analyst at JP Morgan.

Underscoring the value of state contracts, manufacturers provide formula virtually for free to retailers. Bigger states demand bigger discounts. California retailers, for example, which have the highest percentage of participants nationwide, enjoy discounts over 95 percent of wholesale price, according to analyst reports. 

Despite the deep discounts formula manufacturers must endure to score state contracts, contract wins often more than compensate for lost upfront revenue. A 2011 Economic Research Service Report found that companies gain nearly 7.5 percent market share in a given state within a number of months after winning a contract. The study also cites additional reasons why manufactures agree to participate, including additional shelf life with better product placement in retail stores. 

The Economic Research Service Report also suggests the WIC program may encourage support for particular formula brands by the medical community. Hospitals and physicians, **“may decide to recommend the WIC brand to all patients to avoid having to differentiate between those enrolled and not enrolled,”** according to the study.
