---
title: Infant formula ad budgets continue to climb
chapter: 6
---


Global advertising regulations may be on the rise, but formula manufacturers are still pouring an increasing amount of money into their ad budgets. In 2014, the Wall Street Journal reported that marketing spend by formula manufacturers rose 70 percent from 2010. **This year, analysts expect this trend to continue, predicting record spending in the second quarter on ads by Mead Johnson, among others.** 

Especially in the U.S. where regulations remain low, manufacturers continue to find success targeting new moms beginning in the hospital setting. A graphic included in a 2011 corporate presentation by Mead Johnson describes the company’s “demand generation model.” Beginning with pregnancy, they target “the hospital experience,” followed by products for moms “coming home” and beyond. 

>*As Jakobsen assured investors, “We have…metrics that show that when we [advertise], we get a trial. And when we get a trial, we get a repeat [purchase].”*

Advertising for prescription drugs is highly regulated in the U.S. In the early 1960s, amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act limited prescription drug marketing to only those products deemed safe and effective by the FDA. Policies like these are intended to protect both patients and prescribers from unsubstantiated or misleading claims. 

Some experts believe that such restrictions should be extended to formula, too.

According Richter, the regulation of the U.S. formula industry remains a “critical – and unfinished – task of global democratic governance.”

Crowe agrees. 

>*“What I find most disturbing is that basically we’ve had a complete divorce from the pharma industry because of the known influence they can have,” she said. “Yet somehow formula was not considered in that. And I find it of questionable judgment that we’ve allowed that to continue.”*
